docs: establish Artifacts WG (#409)
cncf/tag-app-delivery: artifacts-wg/charter/charter.md

# Purpose

> In the distributed world of cloud-native computing different artifacts and packages are used to transport configuration and code for the many services and capabilities that comprise and support workloads and applications. As an example, today ArtifactHub advertises that it can crawl about 20 such artifact types [1]. These "cloud-native" bundles add to the previous proliferation of package and artifact types for software dependencies such as Maven and npm and for system packages like deb and rpm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the distributed world of cloud-native computing, different artifacts and packages are used to transport configuration and code for the many services and capabilities that comprise and support various types of workloads. As an example, today ArtifactHub advertises that it can crawl about 20 such artifact types [1]. These "cloud-native" bundles adds to the previous proliferation of package and artifact types for software dependencies, such as Maven and npm and for system packages, like deb and rpm.
```

> This abundance of package types and formats adds complexity and risk for cloud application developers and architects trying to provision and run cloud-native workloads. Different tools and controllers must be carefully learned and installed to bundle, unbundle, verify and deploy each artifact type. This complexity slows product development by users, impedes innovation and collaboration amongst projects, and increases risks of insecure configuration.

Reviewer: Are we attempting to limit scope to "cloud native"? I understand that this WG is within the CNCF realm, but for components in the application packaging space, like Maven and npm, there is no assumption that they will be delivered to cloud native targets.

> This abundance of package types and formats adds complexity and risk for cloud application developers and architects trying to provision and run cloud-native workloads. Different tools and controllers must be carefully learned and installed to bundle, unbundle, verify and deploy each artifact type. This complexity slows product development by users, impedes innovation and collaboration amongst projects, and increases risks of insecure configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This abundance of package types and formats adds complexity and risk for cloud application developers and architects trying to provision and run cloud-native workloads. Different tools and controllers must be carefully tailored and installed to bundle, unbundle, verify and deploy each artifact type. This complexity slows product development for users, impedes innovation and collaboration amongst projects, and increases risks of insecure configuration.
```

> To reduce this complexity and facilitate collaboration and innovation, WG Artifacts will gather stakeholders from many CNCF and open source projects offering packaging, distribution and deployment mechanisms for bundles of configuration and code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To reduce this complexity and facilitate collaboration and innovation, WG Artifacts will gather stakeholders from many CNCF and open source projects to offer packaging, distribution and deployment mechanisms for bundles of configuration manifests and source code.
```

Author: I'm not sure if your suggestion here captures the intent of the original text.

Reviewer 2: I think there's a significant difference between "offering" and "to offer". The idea here is that the group will bring together projects that _already_ offer bundle and packaging capabilities but currently follow their own siloed patterns and practices. We intend to bring these groups closer together in spirit _and_ implementations.

I'm fine with the latter changes but I think we should leave "offering" as is.

> **The WG will:**  

Reviewer: Should there also be any discussion related to advocating for the approaches that come out of the working group with others in the CNCF community?

Reviewer 2: There's a line "Advocate for innovative projects", is that sufficient @sabre1041?

I think the group intends to evangelize projects and products that contribute to evolution of and innovation in standard practices and patterns.

* **Develop common patterns**  
*  **Advocate for innovative projects**  
*  **Gather end user feedback**

> **for packaging, discovery, distribution, and deployment mechanisms for** **cloud-native software artifacts.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**For packaging, discovery, distribution, and deployment mechanisms for** **cloud-native software artifacts.**
```

Reviewer: What is this goal indicating?

# Alignment with TAG App Delivery and CNCF

> TAG App Delivery's charter [2] calls on the TAG to develop best practices, foster collaboration between projects, improve interoperability and propose new initiatives and projects related to the following domains which this working group would target.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TAG App Delivery's charter [2] calls on the TAG to develop best practices, foster collaboration between projects, improve interoperability, and propose new initiatives and projects related to the following domains for which this working group would target.
```

* Application bundling and deployment
* Package management
* Application delivery workflow and strategy
* Configuration source-driven workflow
* Release management

> The work on extensions, patterns and prototypes in this CNCF TAG complements work on specifications in the Open Containers Initiative (OCI) itself.

Reviewer: Recommend removing the explicit mention of OCI as it is a bit too implementation specific. While yes, OCI is certainly an initial target, should it be in the charter for the WG?

Reviewer 3: I wouldn't mind keeping it as `this CNCF TAG complements work in other projects like OCI`

Reviewer 4: Agree with @sabre1041 and @sajayantony  . I think this WG should not be limited to specifications in OCI only, it would be flexible to mention that OCI spec is an example initiative. I guess the Artifact WG may also has its own Spec or contribute to other project specifications in the future.

Reviewer 2: @sabre1041 @FeynmanZhou makes sense, I agree this line makes it sound like we're focusing exclusively on OCI bundles.

Perhaps we could add to the end of the sentence: 

"The work ... in this CNCF TAG complements work on specifications in ~~the~~ Open Containers Initiative (OCI) ~~itself~~, but will consider other packaging formats and not be limited only to OCI."

# Goals
* Research - Collect existing software packaging schemas, use-cases, and other evidence to aid in the design of a data model and search API for artifact management. 

> * Design - Define a conceptual model and search API from the lessons learned from research, that will be used to build prototypes and inform future specifications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Design - Define a conceptual model and search API from the lessons learned from the research phase, that will be used to build prototypes and inform future specifications.
```

> * Prototype - Develop prototype implementations of a data model and search API based on the work from the design phase to validate the design and to provide a reference implementation for future specifications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Prototype - Develop prototype implementations of a data model and search API based on the work from the design phase to validate the approach and to provide a reference implementation for future specifications.
```

# Activities
The working group intends to carry out (but is not limited to) the following:
* Gather stakeholders using OCI specifications distribution-spec and image-spec to package and distribute artifacts to document their bundle layouts and content schemas and seek common patterns.

> * Gather stakeholders using non-OCI formats to document their layout and schemas and seek synergies and opportunities. Focus on these artifacts types in priority order:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Gather stakeholders using non-OCI formats to document their layout and schemas to seek synergies and opportunities. Focus on the following artifacts types in priority order:
```

>   1. Cloud-native artifact types not currently packaged in OCI, e.g. those in ArtifactHub [3]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1. Cloud-native artifact types not currently packaged in OCI format, e.g. those in ArtifactHub [3]
```

>   2. Software library artifacts such as those in npm, pyPi and Maven Central

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  2. Software library artifacts, such as those in npm, PyPi, and Maven Central
```

>   3. System package artifacts such as those in rpm, deb, brew

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  3. System package artifacts, such as those in RPM, deb, and brew repositories
```

> * Advocate for and contribute to common formats to enable search and discovery of attributes and aspects of artifacts like SBOMs, attestations and other elements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Advocate for and contribute to common formats to enable search and discovery of attributes and aspects of artifacts like SBOM's, attestations, and other elements
```

* Establish "duck types" [4] for common attributes

> * Demonstrate via prototypes use of published schemas to facilitate query and analysis of bundles and content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Demonstrate via prototypes the use of published schemas to facilitate query and analysis of bundles and content.
```

This abundance of package types and formats adds complexity and risk for cloud application developers and architects trying to provision and run cloud-native workloads. Different tools and controllers must be carefully learned and installed to bundle, unbundle, verify and deploy each artifact type. This complexity slows product development by users, impedes innovation and collaboration amongst projects, and increases risks of insecure configuration.

To reduce this complexity and facilitate collaboration and innovation, WG Artifacts will gather stakeholders from many CNCF and open source projects offering packaging, distribution and deployment mechanisms for bundles of configuration and code.

**The WG will:**  

> * **Develop common patterns**  

Reviewer 5: Will you really be developing patterns rather than observing and notating what is in use?

Author: I'm hoping that my refactor on the goals section clarifies this a bit. Can you PTAL and let me know if you'd like this bit about patterns reworked?

Reviewer 2: @AlexsJones I believe the group intends to influence common patterns directly. First they'll gather up many existing practices, then they'll share practices and patterns across them, and finally they'll influence and standardize these common practices in OCI specifications.

*  **Advocate for innovative projects**  
*  **Gather end user feedback**
**for packaging, discovery, distribution, and deployment mechanisms for** **cloud-native software artifacts.**

# Alignment with TAG App Delivery and CNCF
TAG App Delivery's charter [2] calls on the TAG to develop best practices, foster collaboration between projects, improve interoperability and propose new initiatives and projects related to the following domains which this working group would target.

* Application bundling and deployment
* Package management
* Application delivery workflow and strategy
* Configuration source-driven workflow
* Release management

The work on extensions, patterns and prototypes in this CNCF TAG complements work on specifications in the Open Containers Initiative (OCI) itself.

# Goals
* Gather existing schemas used via OCI Artifacts as described in https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec
* Contribute to a common data model for Artifacts in OCI

> * Seek to minimize or avoid any specification changes

Reviewer 6: Consider removing since this covers how rather than why. We may still do this, but it can also be an arbitrary constraint on our work.

Author: Removed

> * Define an Artifact Query API based on specific or common data models as an OCI distribution-spec extension

Reviewer 6: I'm trying to figure out how to rephrase this towards the problem being solved vs the how we are solving it. I'm not excited about my phrasing, but I want to get to a search/query API that may need more parameters than exist in current OCI query APIs.

```suggestion
* Define an API to query for Artifacts using parameters needed for the different types of Artifact tooling.
```

Author: I used this as inspo in my goals refactor. Can you PTAL?

* Publish a prototypical implementation of the Artifact Query API service within a registry and a prototypical implementation of a client for that API service

# Activities
The working group intends to carry out (but is not limited to) the following:
* Gather stakeholders using OCI specifications distribution-spec and image-spec to package and distribute artifacts to document their bundle layouts and content schemas and seek common patterns.

> * Why? Reduce cognitive load on end users, reduce errors in configuration, and optimize ongoing development in this space.

Reviewer 5: This isn't an activity is it?

Author: Good catch. I've removed it.

To reduce this complexity and facilitate collaboration and innovation, WG Artifacts will gather stakeholders from many CNCF and open source projects offering packaging, distribution and deployment mechanisms for bundles of configuration and code.

**The WG will:**  
* **Develop common patterns**  
*  **Advocate for innovative projects**  
*  **Gather end user feedback**
**for packaging, discovery, distribution, and deployment mechanisms for** **cloud-native software artifacts.**

# Alignment with TAG App Delivery and CNCF
TAG App Delivery's charter [2] calls on the TAG to develop best practices, foster collaboration between projects, improve interoperability and propose new initiatives and projects related to the following domains which this working group would target.

* Application bundling and deployment
* Package management
* Application delivery workflow and strategy
* Configuration source-driven workflow
* Release management

> The work on extensions, patterns and prototypes in this CNCF TAG complements work on official specifications in the Open Containers Initiative (OCI) itself.

Reviewer 7: nit: official is redundant

Author: Agreed

# Goals

> * Gather existing schemas used via OCI Artifacts as described in https://github.com/opencontainers/artifacts

Reviewer 6: I'm expecting this repo to be archived in the not too distant future:
https://github.com/opencontainers/artifacts/issues/61
https://github.com/opencontainers/artifacts/issues/63

We may want to link to image-spec instead.

Reviewer 7: Having this group demonstrates theres been a lot of value in OCI Artifacts, so it's not clear why we would archive the repo.

Reviewer 6: I think that discussion is best had in the linked issues. The short version is that image-spec has added a lot of details on how to package content other than images, and it has made changes that aren't included in the artifact repo. Rather than trying to keep the two in sync, I think it makes sense to consolidate to one repo.

Author: I've removed the reference altogether in my re-imagining of the goals section.

Reviewer 8: That,

1) all "artifacts" use OCI artifacts path and by extension use the dist-spec referrers facility

- OR -

2) all "artifacts" use https://github.com/opencontainers/artifacts (or derivative) and/or implement specs coming out of this WG

remains unresolved IMO.

I suspect this may just turn out to be a cost-benefit business decision in the end. Too costly to do 2) so just do 1) for example. But not sure we want to make this assumption so early in the game.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for this discussion, it's helpful to understand the potential issues with existing artifacts and the evolution of image-spec. Thanks for participating in this group @sudo-bmitch.

> * Develop a pattern for dynamically discovering existing Artifact schemas

Reviewer 6: There's dynamically discovering schemas, and dynamically discovering the artifacts themselves. The former may be both more difficult and less useful to end users.

Author: I have thoughts on this, but since the line is removed, I'll save them for when we discuss implementation.

Reviewer 2: FWIW there's a comparison to be made with JSON schema and <https://www.schemastore.org/json/>. VS Code and other tools rely on schemastore for type checks and coding hints; perhaps runtime tools also verify manifests against published schemas. Of course, schemastore is a static registration system like IANA. My point is there does seem to be value in enabling many tools and services to discover the types and schemas behind manifests.

> This in contrast to asking all schema developers to publish media types via IANA.

Reviewer 7: Iana registration feels like a specific thing that might be part of the discussion, but is it a goal to remove?
Iana registration was used to solve a clearing house of ownership for a specific `artifactType`, It solves the conflicting file extensions type problem. What keeps someone from defining different versions of "helm", or "spdx"? 
See [Defining a Unique Artifact Type](https://github.com/opencontainers/artifacts/blob/main/artifact-authors.md#defining-a-unique-artifact-type)
To avoid bike shedding specifics here, perhaps we can remove line 28, and explore the dynamic discovery?

Author: @SteveLasker, I agree that we should not call out IANA here, however I do think that defining an extensibility model is important for the working group to have as a goal. Ideally, it would take administrative burden off of registry operators and publishers by dynamically registering schemas as they are used to describe artifacts and their relationships.

Reviewer 9: In an effort to not over promise we might want to make a section called "Stretch Goals" to cover topics including decentralization and federation.  We could also include as a stretch goal something about how OCI could be a package indices replacement for PyPI, Apt, etc.

Reviewer 9: I think the "package index" idea is covered under the "Search Query API" goal.  It might make sense to add "package index" to the "Activities" section where we talk about npm, PyPI, etc.  We only discuss the artifacts in that activity (i.e., how we might store them) and not how we might search for them (i.e., the package index functionality).

Reviewer 2: To be frank I expect we'll keep static registration but introduce experiments for dynamic type/schema discovery alongside that.

I think we've removed this topic from the charter in any case, LGTM.

> * Contribute to a common data model for Artifacts in OCI

Reviewer 6: There's going to be more than one data model for artifact content. This implies they will all have a single model.

Reviewer 6: If this is getting into defining a new OCI manifest type, OCI is already planning to look at a replacement for the artifact manifest after the image-spec 1.1 release. It's probably better to do that over in OCI.

Author: I think that's the reason that this working group was originally pitched to the OCI maintainers. It would be unfortunate if the next OCI data model was not compatible with the search API. With consideration for that prior attempt at establishing this working group under OCI, do you have any suggestions for combining these efforts or at least ensuring this working group's output is a consideration in the development of the next OCI data model?

Reviewer 6: Our focus right now is on the 1.1 release. Once that's done, merging efforts would be great.

Reviewer 6: This could be rephrased a bit to focus on the need to package various types of artifacts vs defining a single model (depending on the level where we implement this, we may still have a single model, we may leverage an existing model, or there may be multiple models).

```suggestion
* Define data models for storing Artifacts in OCI
```

Reviewer 5: I would caution activities that define a deliverable outcome as that's what your success will be hinged upon.
Defining OCI for artefacts is going to be a long process of getting people to agree with each other. 
Perhaps you can save yourself with wording here
```suggestion
Identify an exemplar data model for storing artefacts in OCI
```

Author: @sudo-bmitch @AlexsJones, based on your suggestions and the feedback from @justincormack, I've tried to better address this in the revised goals.
